---
layout: post 
title:  "[NEW PAPER] Trouble in Paradise? Understanding Mastodon Admin's Motivations, Experiences, and Challenges Running Decentralised Social Media"
date: "August 04, 2024"
description: "Challenges of running decentralised social media"
author: Jun Zhao
image: "/img/banners/AdobeStock_217485588.jpeg"
#banneranchor: 50%
extlabel: A first user study with Mastodon admins
pin: true
---


The paper "Trouble in Paradise? Understanding Mastodon Admin's Motivations, Experiences, and Challenges Running Decentralised Social Media" has been accepted for publication by CSCW 2024 and to be presented in November.



Led by our second-year DPhil student [Zhilin Zhang](https://www.cs.ox.ac.uk/people/zhilin.zhang/), the paper discusses the motivations, experiences, and challenges faced by administrators of the prominent decentralized social media platform, Mastodon.



Decentralised social media platforms are increasingly being recognised as viable alternatives to their centralised counterparts. Among these, Mastodon stands out as a popular alternative, offering a citizen-powered option distinct from larger and centralised platforms like Twitter/X. However, the future path of Mastodon remains uncertain, particularly in terms of its challenges and the long-term viability of a more citizen-powered internet. In this paper, following a pre-study survey, we conducted semi-structured interviews with 16 Mastodon instance administrators, including those who host instances to support marginalised and stigmatised communities, to understand their motivations and lived experiences of running decentralised social media. Our research indicates that while decentralised social media offers significant potential in supporting the safety, identity and privacy needs of marginalised and stigmatised communities, they also face considerable challenges in content moderation, community building and governance. We emphasise the importance of considering the community's values and diversity when designing future support mechanisms.



[See the full blog post about the paper](https://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/news/decentralised-social-media-increases-citizen-empowerment).